Update test for format string article (#339)
OWASP/wstg: document/4_Web_Application_Security_Testing/4.8_Input_Validation_Testing/4.8.14.3_Testing_for_Format_String.md

* PHP: String formatter Analyzer in [phpsa](https://github.com/ovr/phpsa/blob/master/docs/05_Analyzers.md#function_string_formater)

### Manual Code Inspection

Static analysis may miss more subtle cases including format strings generated by complex code. To look for vulnerabilities manually in a codebase, a tester can look for all calls in the codebase that accept a format string and trace back to make sure untrusted input cannot change the format string.

### Conversion Specifier Injection

Testers can check at the unit test or full system test level by sending conversion specifiers in any string input. [Fuzz](https://owasp.org/www-community/Fuzzing) the program using all of the conversion specifiers for all languages the system under test uses. See the [OWASP Format string attack](https://owasp.org/www-community/attacks/Format_string_attack) page for possible inputs to use. If the test fails, the program will crash or display an unexpected output. If the test passes, the attempt to send a conversion specifier should be blocked, or the string should go through the system with no issues as with any other valid input.

> Examples that follow assume the vulnerability is in argument `x` in a site `https://vulnerable_host/userinfo?username=x`

Author: Changed in 836789b : I changed to two sentences to reduce the number of clauses (it turned into a run-on sentence if I had [vulnerability, value, URL, following examples, parameter] all crammed in).

Additionally I changed it to not say vulnerability but instead "user input" because reading it over, I started to read it as if all username inputs were vulnerable.

* If I say "vulnerable username parameter" it may read like the username is the vulnerable thing to change
* Similarly "vulnerable value x" makes it sound like the bits that you are passing has a vulnerability built in
* Mentioning the code "vulnerable code that parses the username parameter" looked too long when immediately following that sentence was examples of crashes that better explained what is manipulated to cause a crash

### Manual Code Inspection

Static analysis may miss more subtle cases including format strings generated by complex code. To look for vulnerabilities manually in a codebase, a tester can look for all calls in the codebase that accept a format string and trace back to make sure untrusted input cannot change the format string.

### Conversion Specifier Injection

Testers can check at the unit test or full system test level by sending conversion specifiers in any string input. [Fuzz](https://owasp.org/www-community/Fuzzing) the program using all of the conversion specifiers for all languages the system under test uses. See the [OWASP Format string attack](https://owasp.org/www-community/attacks/Format_string_attack) page for possible inputs to use. If the test fails, the program will crash or display an unexpected output. If the test passes, the attempt to send a conversion specifier should be blocked, or the string should go through the system with no issues as with any other valid input.

Examples that follow assume the vulnerability is in argument `x` in a site `https://vulnerable_host/userinfo?username=x`

#### Manual Injection

> Testers can perform a manual test using a web browser or other web API debugging tools. Browse to the web application or site such that the query has conversion specifiers. Note that most conversion specifiers need [encoding](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986#section-2.1) if sent inside a URL because they contain special characters including `%` and `{`. The test can be introduce a string of specifiers `%s%s%s%n` by browsing with the following URL:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Testers can perform a manual test using a web browser or other web API debugging tools. Browse to the web application or site such that the query has conversion specifiers. Note that most conversion specifiers need [encoding](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986#section-2.1) if sent inside a URL because they contain special characters including `%` and `{`. The test can introduce a string of specifiers `%s%s%s%n` by browsing with the following URL:
```

The `fuzz.txt` file contains the following:

* A valid input `alice` to verify the application can process a normal input
* Two strings with C-like conversion specifiers
* One Python conversion specifier to attempt to read global variables
* A valid input `bob` to verify the application can still function after handling the invalid inpts

To send the fuzzing input file to the web application under test, use the following command:

`wfuzz -c -z file,fuzz.txt,urlencode https://vulnerable_host/userinfo?username=FUZZ`

In the above call, the `urlencode` argument enables the approprate escaping for the strings and `FUZZ` (with the capital letters) tells the tool where to introduce the inputs.

An example output is as follows

```text
ID           Response   Lines    Word     Chars       Payload
===================================================================

000000001:   200        0 L      1 W      3 Ch        "bob"
000000002:   500        0 L      5 W      142 Ch      "%25s%25s%25s%25n"
000000004:   200        0 L      1 W      48 Ch       "%7Bevent.__init__.__globals__%5BCONFIG%5D%5BSECRET_KEY%5D%7D"
000000003:   500        0 L      5 W      137 Ch      "%25p%25p%25p%25p%25p"

> 000000005:   200        0 L      1 W      4 Ch        "jane"

Reviewer: can you replace this with alice, as per your example above?

Author: I did a direct fix by rerunning in cc53b4b 

Now to see if all the merging and commits with the web GUI introduced any errors 👯‍♂

```

> This output shows that the target site is vulnerable to the injection of C-like `%s` and `%p` conversion specifiers, but it still responds after encountering the injection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above results validates the application's weakness to the injection of C-like conversion specifiers `%s` and `%p`. The last valid string validates that the application is functioning normally after the injection attempts.
```

* Perl [printf](https://perldoc.perl.org/functions/printf.html) and sprintf

These format string functions cannot write to memory, but attackers can still cause information disclosure by changing format strings to output values the developers did not intend to send:

* Python 2.6 and 2.7 [str.format](https://docs.python.org/2/library/string.html) and Python 3 unicode [str.format](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#str.format) can be modified by injecting strings that can point to [other variables](https://lucumr.pocoo.org/2016/12/29/careful-with-str-format/) in memory

The following format string functions can cause runtime errors if the attacker adds conversion specifiers:

* Java [String.format](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/String.html#format%28java.util.Locale%2Cjava.lang.String%2Cjava.lang.Object...%29) and [PrintStream.format](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/io/PrintStream.html#format%2528java.util.Locale%252Cjava.lang.String%252Cjava.lang.Object...%2529)
* PHP [printf](https://www.php.net/manual/es/function.printf.php)

> The code pattern that causes a format string vulnerability is a call to a string format function that contains unsanitized user input. The following example shows how a debug `printf` could make a program vulnerable:

Author: After re-reading with a fresher head, I don't like this sentence. It looks run-on with its two clauses started with "that".

## Summary

A format string is a null-terminated character sequence that also contains conversion specifiers interpreted or converted at runtime.  If server-side code [concatenates a user's input with a format string](https://www.netsparker.com/blog/web-security/string-concatenation-format-string-vulnerabilities/), an attacker can append additional conversion specifications to cause a runtime error, information disclosure, or buffer overflow.

> The worst case for format strings occur in languages that don't check arguments and also include a `%n` specifier that actually writes to memory. These functions, if exploited by an attacker modifying a format string, could cause [information disclosure and code execution](https://www.veracode.com/security/format-string):

Reviewer 2: > "...case for format string vulnerabilities..."

* Java [String.format](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/String.html#format(java.lang.String,java.lang.Object...)) and [PrintStream.format](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/io/PrintStream.html#format(java.util.Locale,java.lang.String,java.lang.Object...))
* PHP's [printf](https://www.php.net/manual/es/function.printf.php)

The code pattern that causes a format string vulnerability is usually an append or concatenate inside the an argument passed to a format string. A direct example for Java is as follows:

```java
final String userName = /* input from user controlled field */;
final int numCredits = /* input from some datastore call */;

// Vulnerable code:
final String outputGreeting = String.format(userName + " has %d credits", numCredits);
// ...send that outputGreeting to the rest of the app
```

In this particular example, if the attacker set their _userName_ to `%s`, `%d`, or any one of Java's specifiers that require an input, the application would crash. Attacks in other languages work in the same way, in which the attacker adds specifiers to cause undesired behaviour.

> ## How to Test

Reviewer 2: Please insert a Test Objectives section between summary and how to test

https://github.com/OWASP/wstg/blob/master/template/999.2_Template_Explanation_WSTG-FOO-002.md#test-objectives

### Static Analysis

Static analysis tools can find format string vulnerabilities in either the code or in binaries. Examples of tools include:

* C and C++: [Flawfinder](https://dwheeler.com/flawfinder/)  
* Java: FindSecurityBugs rule [FORMAT_STRING_MANIPULATION](https://find-sec-bugs.github.io/bugs.htm#FORMAT_STRING_MANIPULATION)
* PHP: String formatter Analyzer in [phpsa](https://github.com/ovr/phpsa/blob/master/docs/05_Analyzers.md#function_string_formater)

### Manual Code Inspection

Static analysis may miss more subtle cases including format strings come from complex code. To look for vulnerabilities manually in a codebase, a tester can look for all calls in the codebase that accept a format string and trace back to make sure untrusted input cannot change the format string.

### Format Specifyer Injection

> 

Reviewer 2: ier

The worst case for format strings vulnerabilities occur in languages that don't check arguments and also include a `%n` specifier that writes to memory. These functions, if exploited by an attacker modifying a format string, could cause [information disclosure and code execution](https://www.veracode.com/security/format-string):

* C and C++ [printf](https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/io/fprintf) and similar methods fprintf, sprintf, snprintf
* Perl [printf](https://perldoc.perl.org/functions/printf.html) and sprintf

These format string functions can't write to memory, but attackers can still cause information disclosure by changing format strings to output values the developers did not intend to send:

* Python 2.6 and 2.7 [str.format](https://docs.python.org/2/library/string.html) and Python 3 unicode [str.format](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#str.format) can be modified by injecting strings that can point to [other variables](https://lucumr.pocoo.org/2016/12/29/careful-with-str-format/) in memory

The following format strings if modified can cause runtime errors if the attacker adds conversion specifier:

> * Java [String.format](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/String.html#format(java.lang.String,java.lang.Object...)) and [PrintStream.format](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/io/PrintStream.html#format(java.util.Locale,java.lang.String,java.lang.Object...))

Author: Do you have an example of a checker that will warn or fail if this occurs? (to prevent the back-and-forth of accidentally introducing more typos and whatnot) I'll see if there's a vscode or command line tool, but if you know one off-hand that would be good.

Another task can be to add this to linter so human reviewers can focus on content, if that isn't done yet 😄

* PHP [printf](https://www.php.net/manual/es/function.printf.php)

The code pattern that causes a format string vulnerability is usually an append or concatenate to the format string argument of a _printf_ or _format_ function. A direct example for Java is as follows:

```java
final String userName = /* input from user controlled field */;
final int numCredits = /* input from some datastore call */;

// Vulnerable code:
final String outputGreeting = String.format(userName + " has %d credits", numCredits);
// ...send that outputGreeting to the rest of the app

> ```

Reviewer 3: This is great. I think we should add a C example as well. 

```c
// A simple C program with format 
// string vulnerability 
#include<stdio.h> 
  
int main(int argc, char** argv) 
{ 
    char buffer[100]; 
    strncpy(buffer, argv[1], 100); 
  
    // We are passing command line 
    // argument to printf 
    printf(buffer); 
  
    return 0; 
} 
```
In the case above, the attacker can pass the string “%p %p %p %p %p %p %p %p %p %p %p %p %p %p %p” and fool printf into thinking it has 15 arguments. It will then print the next 15 addresses on the stack.

```
./a.out "%p %p %p %p %p %p %p %p %p %p %p %p %p %p %p"
0xffffdddd 0x64 0xf7ec1289 0xffffdbdf 0xffffdbde (nil) 0xffffdcc4 0xffffdc64 (nil) 0x25207025 0x70252070 0x20702520 0x25207025 0x70252070 0x20702520
```
I reference these examples a ton when digging into C. This might also help with test cases.

`https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/format-string-vulnerability-and-prevention-with-example/`
`http://codearcana.com/posts/2013/05/02/introduction-to-format-string-exploits.html`
`https://www.defcon.org/images/defcon-18/dc-18-presentations/Haas/DEFCON-18-Haas-Adv-Format-String-Attacks.pdf`

Author: @Zeerg 👍 for the links, expecially the Defcon: one of the reasons I was low on C/C++ examples was the train of articles I was going through were mainly rewrites of the same content from the year 2000 papers.

For the examples, should we actually have it fully executable like that main method? (i.e. modify the Java as well)

I'm a bit divided on the command line arguments -> printf  

* Good: Smallest number of lines of code, and a reader can dump it into a compiler or REPL loop to try it out
* Bad: If you have the arguments -> printf, someone will misinterpret and think that the fixed version of the code is 100% safe and then still have the [command injection](https%3A%2F%2Fowasp.org%2Fwww-community%2Fattacks%2FCommand_Injection).

For whatever we decide, I'll set the Java and C examples to be as similar as possible, because we don't want them looking inconsistent.

Reviewer 2: I think as long as we include a note/warning that they're examples of what not to do, then it's fine to include a working sample.

Author: I drafted something together in 4de14f5 although I'm working literally sitting in the bleachers of a fencing tournament 🎪 , so I'll wait until I get my full dev environment back before I test.

Reviewer 4: 😆 That’s dedication!

Reviewer 3: @patrickceg Nice example.

In this particular example, if the attacker set their _userName_ to `%s`, `%d`, or any one of Java's specifiers that require an input, the application would crash. Attacks in other languages work in the same way, in which the attacker adds specifiers to cause undesired behaviour.

## Test Objectives

Assess whether injecting format string conversion specifiers into user-controlled fields causes undesired behaviour from the application.

## How to Test

### Static Analysis

Static analysis tools can find format string vulnerabilities in either the code or in binaries. Examples of tools include:

* C and C++: [Flawfinder](https://dwheeler.com/flawfinder/)  
* Java: FindSecurityBugs rule [FORMAT_STRING_MANIPULATION](https://find-sec-bugs.github.io/bugs.htm#FORMAT_STRING_MANIPULATION)
* PHP: String formatter Analyzer in [phpsa](https://github.com/ovr/phpsa/blob/master/docs/05_Analyzers.md#function_string_formater)

### Manual Code Inspection

> 

Reviewer 3: I hate to have old references/whitepapers laying around because of the outdated links scenario, but I think it's important we include a few references for further reading. Some examples that have helped me in the past.

`https://axcheron.github.io/exploit-101-format-strings/`
`https://www.defcon.org/images/defcon-18/dc-18-presentations/Haas/DEFCON-18-Haas-Adv-Format-String-Attacks.pdf`
`http://www.cis.syr.edu/~wedu/Teaching/cis643/LectureNotes_New/Format_String.pdf`

Reviewer 3: I think the references in the document should suffice now that I took another look at everything.

Static analysis may miss more subtle cases including format strings generated by complex code. To look for vulnerabilities manually in a codebase, a tester can look for all calls in the codebase that accept a format string and trace back to make sure untrusted input cannot change the format string.

> ### Conversion Specifier Injection

Reviewer: As much as I love references, I see it essential to add testing cases and scenarios for a tester to follow in order to validate this.
Could you possibly be able to add a list of tests to be conducted?

Reviewer 3: I agree with @ThunderSon. I added an example test case in the C example.

Reviewer 2: I think we need here is an example of how a tester would send such input (via Zap or Burp..even curl) and what they should be looking for in response etc to determine that an issue is present.

Reviewer 2: If you deem it applicable/practical you could even describe how to manually replicate the steps this scan rule performs:
https://github.com/zaproxy/zap-extensions/blob/master/addOns/ascanrules/src/main/java/org/zaproxy/zap/extension/ascanrules/FormatString.java

(If that helps.)

Author: Added instructions for wfuzz as it's installed in most Kali and took the least lines to trigger (and although I didn't try it, you could probably feed the same "wordlist" text file into ZAP
